I have no emotional attachment to any
exercise. If your goal is to, you know,
have a strong body that moves well and
is free from injury and looks good. You
don't need a bench press. Bench press is
a great exercise, but you don't need it.
I find that this technique allows me to
shift a heavier load and allows me to do
it safer for myself and everyone that I
work with. So, if I thought that there
was a better way, I promise you that's
what I'd be teaching you. Welcome to my
bench press session. My name is
Sebastian
Orb, otherwise known as the Australian
strength coach, and I've got a 250 kg
bench press. Not today, but that's the
best I've ever done. And I'm going to
teach you everything that I do to be
able to press a lot of weight. My last
heavy was 205
kg. So, my goal in the short term is
220. And I'm showing you my programming
to approach that. 220 kg at 100 kg body
weight. When I did 250, I weighed 118
kg. That was the heaviest that I got to.
So, I don't think I'll get that number
again. I think 220 at 43 years old and
100 kg body weight is a nice goal. Today
is my light day. So, if you watch last
week's session, accessory day. So, I do
two days a week of bench press. One
heavy day, one light day. So, my light
day last week was 160 kg spotto press
for three sets of three. And I need to
progress from that. Now, the last set I
did an AM wrap, which means as many reps
as possible, and I did five
reps. One or two in the tank. So, you
know, if I'm being honest, I think I
went a little bit too light. So, that's
a question that I often uh answer when
people say, "What if I go too light on
week one?" I say, "Great, we take a
bigger jump on week two." So, on the top
of my mind coming into this session, I
believe I'm going to take a bigger jump
than scheduled. So, it was meant to be
160 and then up in 5 kg, but I've made a
decision loosely within myself. It might
change to maybe go to 170 today. I think
that's more appropriate. 170 today, and
then we'll see next week if we go back
to the regular 5 kilos. So, 170 today,
175 next week, and then the last week
180. And I think I should be able to do
that. But if not, I'll go back to
original plan, which was 5 kg
increments. So, 165. The only reason I'm
thinking that it might not get there is
yesterday I donated
blood, which is something that I'd love
to say is because I'm just a really nice
person and I want to save lives. But the
honest reason why I did that is because
yes, it's a bonus that I get to help
people, but I also help myself. So
donating blood every 3 months, it's kind
of like giving your body an oil change.
get rid of the old blood and get some
new blood anyway. So, I don't know what
impact that will have on my strength
today. Maybe nothing. You know, I still
weigh the same amount, which is 100 kg
or 101 kg. We shall see. Something that
I often say is how you feel is a lie,
right? What does that mean? It means
sometimes you can come into the gym and
feel amazing and have a terrible day. On
the flip side, sometimes you feel
terrible and everything's just not going
right, but then you end up having a good
day. So, a lot of the times when people
ask me, "How you feeling while I'm
warming up?" My answer is, "I don't know
yet." We'll see. We'll see when the top
set comes around and then I'll tell you
how I'm feeling. But anyway, warming up
dumbbells.
So, I don't know how many reps um on
this. What's this? 25 kg dumbbells. I'll
then go to 30 kg dumbbells which is the
exact weight. So that's total of 60 kg
which will be my first well no it won't.
My first warmup weight I believe is
going to be 70 kg. So I'll even do 35 kg
dumbbells. I'll keep on warming up with
dumbbells up until I get to my first
warmup weight over there. Lots and lots
of reps of push and pull. So I'll do lat
pull downs as
well. All right. Lat pull down. This is
my favorite attachment.
Uh, I'm not going to be supersetting
these two on my top
sets, but I'm going to be warming up
with a superset as I get to my working
weight. And then I'll do bench press as
a standalone, and then I'll do my
accessories
as push and pull with a super set.
One of my clients asked me today, I'm
training him just for strength and
health and longevity. And he said to
me, I don't like doing bench press. Do I
have to do it? And my answer was
absolutely not. Because he's not a
powerlifter. He doesn't need to do bench
press in his sport. And I try and teach
people that I have no emotional
attachment to any exercise. Unless of
course you need that exercise to play
your sport, then you must do it.
Otherwise, if your goal is to, you know,
have a strong body that moves well and
is free from injury and looks good, uh,
you don't need a bench press. Bench
press is a great exercise, but you don't
need it. Um, there's other exercises you
can do. Dumbbells, I would say, have a
really big advantage on barbells because
it allows a more natural movement of the
shoulders, a longer range of motion. So,
from a muscle building standpoint and a
functional strength standpoint, I would
say dumbbells are probably
better. But from a loadability
standpoint, this is where I believe I've
had a lot of great carryover from the
bench press, learning how to arch the
way that I'm going to be teaching you,
which I teach you every week if you've
been watching, but I'm going to go over
it again and again. Remember where I
learned this technique from? Krill
Sachev. real Sachev was the former world
champion bench press. A 335 kg bench
press was his best. And I believe he's
the most technical of the heavyweight
benches and this is the technique that
he uses. So some people say, "Oh, but
what about, you know, Julius Maddox or
what about choose your other favorite
bench presser?" Yeah, there are many
ways to skin a cat. I just prefer this
technique and I've tried the other
techniques as well and I find that this
technique allows me to shift a heavier
load and allows me to do it safer for
myself and everyone that I work with.
So, if I thought that there was a better
way, I promise you that's what I'd be
teaching you. But that's just my opinion
and everyone's entitled to their own.
But this opinion works. Like it's 335 kg
bench press from Krill. You can't say it
doesn't work. Anyway,
on the Tik Tok like people and just do
chest for I haven't seen the trend. So I
don't know if you guys can hear because
Musi doesn't have the audio on um but
he's talking to me about the trend on
Tik Tok where people saying stop doing
presses and just do flyers. Um I think
that this is the way that social media
twists facts. Um, I think some of our
favorite influencers, two of them in
particular that I saw speaking about
this, one was Dr. Mike Israel and
another one was Dr. Pack. Great guys, I
respect them greatly. And they put up
their top list for their favorite
exercises to build each muscle. Um, and
I believe for both of
them, they chose pec fly over a pec
press, sorry, over a dumbbell press for
pec
development. And then I think that's
what social media does. They go, "Ah,
therefore, if these guys say it,
therefore, that's the answer. This is a
better exercise." And and you should
stop doing
presses. And I don't think Dr. Mike or
Dr. Pack would ever say, "Don't do
presses." I think they at some point in
in their life, they talk about things
like what their favorite exercise is at
the moment. And those things change
always. So, if you ask me what my
favorite pec builder was 5 years ago,
it' probably be different to what it is
now.
and every 5 years or whatever, maybe
every year. It could be slightly
different depending on what I'm doing.
So anyway, um is a pec fly a great
exercise to build pecs? Yeah. Yeah, it
is. Right. So the rule for a muscle to
be good for building muscle. The rule
for an exercise to be good at building
muscle is the muscle you're targeting
needs to be the limiting factor of the
movement. Or in other words, it needs to
be the the reason why you failed that
set is because the target muscle
couldn't do anymore. Now, when you do an
isolation exercise, if like a pec fly,
when you fail the set, it's because the
pecs don't work anymore. So, therefore,
it's a good hypertrophy exercise. When
you fail a press, it could be a number
of things. It could be your triceps are
too weak, and that's what's causing you
to fail. It could be your deltoids. It
could be it could be a number of
different things, and it's hard to
isolate the specific muscle, which is
why people take it out of context and
say it's not as good for building muscle
mass. So, that's not really the case. So
there's also another consideration you
need to have which is why not both.
Okay. So if your goal is pegs, right?
Presses are great, so
flies. Why don't you do them in the same
in the same workout in the same session?
Which ones should you do first? My
opinion, you should do the hardest ones
first, the ones that allow you to shift
the heaviest loads, the ones with the
most technical complexity, which is
usually the compound movements. The
pressing should go first, then the flies
should go second. Some people do it in
reverse, not me. And that's my advice
for you. So if you see a trend, I just
did my wrist wraps for this. I don't
need to do that. But anyhow, if you see
a trend that says stop doing stop doing
this exercise or presses are bad,
doesn't matter what it is. That's a
stupid trend. That's what people do on
social media now. It's called a hook.
Stop doing press or presses are bad or
anything is, you know, there's no good
and
bad, right? They're all kind of neutral.
All these exercises have their pros and
cons and there's a lot of negatives to
flies as well. Like I find a lot of
discomfort when I do my flies. I just
don't like them. I used to love them but
they just don't feel nice for me. So I
don't do
them. But for some people like they love
them and they do them and they get a
great result with them and that's
fantastic.
I love presses and I think I've got
pretty good pretty good results with my
training. Don't you
reckon? And so I'm not wrong either when
I say presses are
great. Okay, that's 35
kg in each hand, which means that's the
weight that I'm going to be starting
with, which is 70 kg over here.
question we got comments saying like
when should I start using belts for like
equipment kind of thing. You don't ever
have to use equipment. So that's the
simple answer. You don't ever have to
use equipment. Um there was a recent
study where they had
uh uh I think it was just wrist wraps
for a bench press and they had you know
men and women I don't know what level
they were. I don't think that they were
an elite level but they showed zero
difference in your strength with wrist
wraps. Now, I would have to say that's
not an elite level because, you know,
for me, doing 200 kg bench press and
plus wouldn't feel comfortable for my
wrists. I have done it before and it
just doesn't feel as
good. Um, but really, you know, up until
those levels, not many people can bench
press 200
kg, right? So, you don't ever really
need the equipment. But, oh, that's
something I don't have, my elbow
sleeves. Um, I like it. It makes me
comfortable with my training. Uh, in
competition, you're not allowed elbow
sleeves, but I've always done well with
training with elbow sleeves. It's just
comfortable, right? And then in
competition day, I've always bench
pressed uh equal or more on competition
day than I do in my training because I
don't train as hard as I can. Uh,
usually I don't go to fail and test true
maxes in the gym. I test my true maxes
in competition day. Well, I try to
anyway. And that's what I recommend. So
anyway, elbow sleeves, no, they're not
allowed, but these are really soft.
These are like really flimsy. It's just
for warmth. Wrist wraps, they are
allowed. And it's just like saying, you
know, when people say, "When should I
use it?" Well, let me ask you a
question. If you were to start playing
football, whether that's soccer or
rugby, what shoes would you wear? Would
you wear sneakers or would you wear the
correct football
boots? I say the same thing was is true
with lifting weights. There's nothing
wrong with using the right equipment. um
you know, wrist wrist wraps, elbow
sleeves, belts, all that stuff. You
don't need it straight away, but if you
do use it, that's totally fine. Um
belt, belt for a bench press. This
is comfortable for me, but not
comfortable for everybody. And the
reason why I like a belt in a bench
press, if you see me do a pause, which
I'm not going to be doing today, but if
you see me do a pause, I like to sink
the weight on my chest.
And when I have my belt on, it allows a
much stronger brace. And when you sink
the weight on your chest with the paws
in a bench press over 200 kg, the bar
will sink a lot, the more it sinks, the
further you have to press it, right? And
if I wear a belt, it doesn't sink as
far. So, it's a stronger position. Uh,
but then the next reason is when I arch
a lot, it can aggravate your back. Backs
are supposed to bend and twist and all
those things. Some people it aggravates.
You're not a bad person if it does, but
most of us, it's totally fine. But I
know that when I do it a lot, it can
aggravate my back a little bit. And when
I use a belt, it alleviates that pain.
So, if arching in a bench press hurts
you, try a belt. If it doesn't hurt you
and you don't need a belt, then you
don't need a belt. Uh, but for me, I
like it. Elbow sleeves, I like it. Not
necessary. And wrist wraps also, I like
it, but also not necessary. So, if your
back continues to hurt with or without a
belt, a rule that I have always is don't
train through pain. So, if it hurts,
there could be some type of underlying
condition. So, let's have a look at my
friend over here. So when people say
I've got back
pain, it's not just like you got back
pain, so therefore this is the cure or
this is the problem. There's different
types of back pain. Sometimes you hurt
your back because your, you know,
flexion um flexion dysfunction. So
bending forward uh places more load on
the discs and that could be aggravating
you. So therefore, uh bending backwards
could be relieving you. On the flip
side, bending backwards places pressure
on this structure here that's called the
facet joints. So that could create some
type of aggravation in which case
bending forward relieves that. Right? So
it's two different types of directions
with the pain and there's other types of
pain as well not just that. So either
way if you bend backwards and it hurts
so that's called spinal extension. You
you might have some type of inflammation
in this area. You might have some type
of underlying condition. And something I
say is if it hurts you don't do it. And
the arch technique that I'm going to be
teaching you that I do I teach people
don't do that. Don't bring your feet
back. Have your feet flat or sometimes
even have your feet on the bench so
you're not bending your back or
extending your spine or arching your
back. Uh and and you're not causing
pain. So that's rule number one. If
something hurts, it's because
something's wrong. Stop doing it and
maybe speak to a professional who
understands that issue. All right. Now,
first set. I'm going to show you the
technique again. So this is a spot
press.
How did it feel? Uh, I don't know.
You like that answer? That's my answer.
That's my answer. I don't know until I
get to kind of like my last warm-up
sets. Of course, 70 kilos is supposed to
feel okay. If I'm going for 170 kg, so a
lot of the times when people ask how it
feels, I don't know. I really don't know
because it's supposed to it is easy, but
it's supposed to be easy.
You do all your sets like it's your top
set, right?
Like exact same thing. The intent is the
same. So there might be, you know, some
people I used to say, same speed, same
everything. And people go, "Oh, what an
idiot." It's not the same speed. Yeah,
it's the same intent. It's the same
intent. So I want to control the weight
down. So I don't just drop it or dump
the bar on my chest just cuz it's light.
And I don't just flop my arms about.
I use control and I consider how's it
going to feel at my top weight. I want
to move the same
way. What's the difference
between like
Yeah, great. So, the difference between
intent and and actual speed is I want to
kind of move at the same speed, right?
So, my intent when I'm pushing my top
set, which today, let's call it 170 kg,
I'm going to push it as hard as I can.
Now, I don't need to push 70 kg as hard
as I can to to move it up with, you
know, a decent speed. It's like when you
stand out of a
chair, do you jump, you know, or do you
stand with just enough force to stand
under control? It's the same thing with
a bench press. That's what I often
recommend. You know, a little bit of
speed. So, don't just uh, you know,
slowly press it up for the sake of being
controlled, right? Push it up with a
with a good pace, but not so much that
you're exploding every lightweight. Same
technique. Same technique. So, we're
warming up with spotter press the whole
way. Look at me how I slide my head off
the bench so that I can bring my feet
back, right? And then I wedge my feet in
position, push my heels down, and I keep
that downwards pressure from start to
finish. And that allows me
to increase my tension and and increase
the size of my arch from start to
finish. So from here, I'm pushing down.
And then I come in, I'm wedging my body
into a bigger arch. Shoulders back and
down. Eyes behind the barbell. Big
breath, you know. Actually, that felt
really nice. It felt like I was in a
really solid position. Everything was
tight and it was just
um seemed seamless. It seemed
weightless. It was just like resting on
the tension I was creating in my
body like, you know, like a bow and
arrow. Bang. You know, tight whack.
Easy. So, that's how that felt. It felt
like I was in a great position, which
changes set to set. Uh, last week I
unwrapped by myself and I decided
that I don't want that this week. It
definitely makes it harder for me. So,
I'm going to get uh my cameraman Musty
to unrackck for me. Now, here's the
thing. Mussy doesn't unrackck for me
ever. Like, he's done it once before.
Um, and unrackcking is a skill and I
know everyone can do it, but you just
have to understand how every bencher
likes the weight to be handed out to
them.
So, the way that I like it, I'm going to
show you guys today with Musty. So,
you're going to see how I teach him to
do it, but I may as well give you a
crash course
now after I put this weight on.
That's never
Oh, yeah. That's a good U I saw that
comment as well. Um, the rules change as
you get stronger, right? So, um, the
stronger you get, the less volume you
should be doing. Because when we talk
about volume, I shouldn't say the less
volume, the less total sets you should
be doing. Because when we calculate
volume, you need to factor in load, how
heavy you're lifting, right? So, I'm
going to be doing 3x3 on 170
kg. If you're doing half of that, you
know, what's that? 85 kg. 3x3 might not
be enough. So like for example when I'm
programming for people like I've got my
own load calculators that determine your
level of strength and I've got
algorithms that figure out if you're
very strong then we'll reduce the amount
of total sets but you know like beginner
and even intermediate you could very
easily do like five sets of three you
know then same with the accessories I
like to do two to three sets but if
you're not as strong you can do you know
three to four sets or four to five sets.
Um I don't believe I'm doing a low
amount of volume. I think I'm doing the
right amount of volume. And I think
that's a mistake that a lot of people
make is they go, you know, they follow
this high volume program that got them
from beginner to intermediate and even
intermediate to advanced. And then they
plateau at that point going, I'm trying
this program. It worked for me before,
but it's not working for me again. Why?
Well, now you're trying to do the same
reps and same sets, but you're a lot
stronger now, and you're doing a much
heavier load, and the body is not able
to recover from that. So that's um
actually feedback that I've gotten from
a lot of my high level athletes when I
work with them for the first time. Uh
the feedback that they quite often give
me is this is less volume than what I'm
used to. And often my response is and
what's the outcome like that's what you
need to be able to answer. Is it a
positive outcome or is it a negative
outcome? And quite often they'll say
well I'm getting stronger. I'm doing
less work and I'm not as tired. Does
that sound like it's a good outcome to
you? Yes, it is not always the case. Uh,
but quite often that is the case,
especially when you get to a high level.
So, the amount of volume that I do, um,
if you're lifting as heavy as me, you
should try doing the same amount of
volume as me, which is not a lot. Um,
but if you're not as strong as me, then
maybe you can add an extra set or
two.
Here are the considerations for a
successful
unrackck is you know often I have my
little sister-in-law Diny J who's 52 kg
girl unrackck for me and she's saved me
from a 200 kg failed bench press before
so she knows how to do it. Uh she is
strong but she can't deadlift 200 kg but
understand the technique and the timing
is what matters the most. So this is
what we need to consider when I'm
unrackcking. I'm still taking a lot of
that weight, just not all of it. Right?
And my objective is to maintain my
shoulder position. So, if I don't have
someone unrackcking for me, I have to
kind of like use a lot of muscles to to
unrackck, which takes my shoulders out
of position. And then trying to get them
back in position with a heavy weight in
my hands, is very difficult. So, that's
why having an unrackcker at high levels,
is always recommended. Now, this is how
I do it. So, you see how I slide back.
So, you got to let the lifter slide back
and get in position and then not stand
here for half an hour while they're
getting in position and thinking about
it with your crutch in their face.
Right? So, you stand back, wait till he
gets in position, he or she, wait till
they get in position, which is eyes
behind the bar. And then once you see
they're in position and they're about to
take their big breath, we come in, check
this out. Thighs on the bar, right? So,
it's like a deadlift. You want to keep
the bar close to your body or
specifically in line with the center of
your base of support, which is your
midoot. So when the barbell is in line
with your midoot, I'm using my hips to
pick it up. I'm not using my arms to
pick it up, right? So you come in close,
thighs on the bar, right? And and you
know, like that was pretty easy for me
to lift. I didn't I didn't row that
weight up. I I kind of just stood that
weight up, right? So all you want to do
is lift it high enough that it kind of
clears the rack. You don't want to lift
it so much. You don't want to just take
all that weight because you want to be
really nice for your bench presser. uh
and take all the weight for them. No,
you can't take them out of position,
right? So, small unrackck, use thighs on
the bar, use your
legs. Okay, and that's it. Now, Musty,
that was my lesson to you. Let's see how
well you go.
[Applause]
pretty good. Musty, um, one place that I
think that you could have improved was,
um, your thighs weren't on the bar.
No, it was a little bit back. You're
doing the And that's what people do.
It's like it's uncomfortable to stand
that close when you're standing over
someone's face with your crutch. You
know what I mean? But at some point you
got to get over it and you're kind of
like safety first. So so get in and and
get out, right? So either way it wasn't
a big deal. That was that was good. But
as it gets heavier and
heavier, that's why I'm having Musty
practice now. Like I don't need an
unrackck for 120 kg bench press.
Um but I want to start having Musti
learn the position that I like to be And
that's why I like to get um my spotter
practice on the lighter weights so that
when we get to the heavy weights, I can
give all my finer details and we can
hopefully perfect it by then. Last warm
up. Uh so what's that? 145
next. So center the barbell, get it in
the right
position is what I'll always be aiming
for. Like when I'm on rack with someone,
that's what you'll see me do. I'll look
to see if it's
symmetrical. That's it. So, rest period,
I'm giving myself
about, you know, from 120, how much rest
do I really need? 2 to 3 minutes. From
145, I'll probably need about 4 minutes.
And then when I get to my first top set,
I'll be taking 8 minutes. So, 145 to 170
for I'll do that for one rep. So, this
is my last warm up. I'll do that for one
rep. I don't need a huge amount of
recovery for that. Uh, but then, you
know, cuz I'm not taking it close to
fail. It's a it's a low effort set, 4
minutes. But then on my first work set,
yeah, I like 8 minutes. I'm not saying
you need 8 minutes. Um, if you're really
strong, yeah, 8 minutes. Some people
think you're going to cool down in that
time. Um, I disagree. Especially because
in powerlifting competition, usually,
uh, you don't get to, not usually, you
don't get to time your rest periods. You
get to go when you your name is called.
And if there is a flight of lifters
um that's big enough. So so you know
usually I like to calculate that each
lift takes about 1 minute. So 8 minutes
works if there's eight
lifters. What if there's more than eight
lifters? What if there's 10 lifters?
What if there's 15 lifters? I've seen
flights that have 15 and more. And I've
been in competitions where I've needed
to rest 20 minutes between my attempts.
What do you do then if eight minutes
cools you down? What are you gonna do in
20 minutes? Well, I'll tell you what I
did. I didn't think about it and I just
did the lift and I stayed warm and I
actually performed well. So, um, that
was something that I used to do
is I was too, you know, OCD with my rest
periods and I used think 8 minutes if
it's longer it's bad. If it's shorter,
it's bad. But then that's what you need
to come to terms with when it comes to
competition. You have no choice. So, you
need to learn to come to a point where
you know I do want a full recovery, but
if it's a little bit longer than that,
it's fine, right? Right? And you have to
learn, especially on competition day,
you need to have a different mentality.
On competition day, you have no choice.
You go when they call you, but usually
they're not what, like one or two people
in the flight, right? So, there's never
going to be a 2-minute rest between sets
in competition. There's typically, you
know, it's typically not even going to
be a 5m minute rest. It's always every
comp that I've been in has been a lot
longer than 5 minute rest between sets.
But in general for strength sets I say
you know minimum 4 minutes if you're a
beginner for a big heavy like if you're
if you're in a strength phase in your
programming and it's a big compound
movement I say even beginners can take
up to 4 minutes rest you know when I say
beginner I don't mean an ab an absolute
beginner probably wouldn't be doing a
strength phase they're doing a movement
phase so so context and absolute
beginners aren't they don't need 5
minutes they don't need four minutes
they don't do big strong movements
they're just learning how to move but
then when you get to the point where
you're competent enough to start testing
your strength and doing a strength
phase. I think five 4 minutes is kind of
like the minimum. Um, you know, so if
you're not doing 4 minutes rest between
your big heavy sets and you're doing
less than
that, maybe you can try and add more
rest and I know that you'll do better.
You're welcome.
Nice. How'd that feel? Better. Yeah.
Easier. Yeah. You had your thighs on the
bar that time, hey, and you're using
your legs. You're not using your arms.
Good. Next set, we go 170. I think you
know that discussion where I said I
don't know if I can do 165 or 170. I
think 170 will be
comfortable. Let's go, bro.
Okay, good
one. That felt actually heavy, but it's
okay. Like, didn't feel too heavy for
three, but it felt heavy.
Good one. That felt better. That felt
better. And I felt like I I paused it
better,
too. But we can never tell. Um, I feel
like the first set was um, pretty
rushed, those pauses. Um, and that's why
I like to, you know, when you're under
the weight, time slows down, right? I
think you were too conservative with
Yeah, that's what much more solid
pauses. That was that was good. I like
that. Um, yeah, I like that. So, that
one. Yeah. So, that's another thing as
well. Sometimes people are too
conservative with the unrackck. So, I
say don't pull too much cuz you're going
to take the lifter out of position. But
then a lot of the times unrackckers,
they think, "Oh, I I can't pull a lot
because it's going to take them out of
position. So, I'm just going to only
gently
help." No, you to take a lot of the
weight, but just don't lift it too high.
And you have to lift it with the lifter,
right? So, you've got to learn to feel
that the, you know, the distance that
I'm going to travel with that. Um, which
takes time to familiarize yourself with.
So when I'm racking for someone, I
actually try and take a lot of the
weight, but I just don't lift it high.
Right? You take a lot of the weight from
here to here. That's all. Right? You
don't want to take them to the position
where the shoulder blade comes out. But
that was a lot better. One more set for
you. For you're the best unracker in the
world. Whenever I mention I literally
can do 10% more than I feel that I'm
pretty good at unrackcking for people.
So, but that's also because I've done it
for so many people. Like, I've
unrackcked my heaviest unrackck was 300
kg. Sorry, not 300, 280 kg. I've done
that three times. I've done it for Josh
Baker was the most recent one that did
uh 280. That was at Thor's gym. I've
done it for Graeme Hicks. I've done it
for Alex Simon, you know, and below that
I've done it for many people over 200.
Many people over 200. as well as I've
bench pressed for a long time and I know
what it what it feels like. So, um I'd
like to think I'm good at it, but it's a
good skill to be good at. You want to be
a good training partner for your for
your bro or for your sis, don't you?
What goes through your mind when I'm
pressing?
Ah, when I'm pressing, to be honest,
these days I'm making sure like my pecs
are
okay, right? So elbow position matters.
So the more I flare my elbows, the
greater the tension is on the pegs. So
I've got to make sure [__] don't want to
put too much stretch on those pegs.
That's a weaker position. Weak things
break. That's how pegs tear, right? So
elbow position. Um you can see that I'm
moving slowly on the down phase,
especially on the first repetition. This
is something that I'm battling with when
I'm in like heavy training mode. So my
last squat session I squatted 260 kg low
bar and that hurts my arms like not
during and not now. There's no pain but
when I hold a heavy bench press it's
just like oh there's a huge fatigue that
I'm fighting my arms. So when I peak for
competition that's another thing you
want to make sure that you haven't
squatted heavy for a while because that
will interfere with how your arms feel.
So yeah, right now I'm not feeling
amazing. That's why I often do a heavy
day and a light day with my bench press.
Right. So this is the structure. So some
of you may know what I'm talking about.
The pain that you get in your elbows, I
call it penis elbow. It's the pain that
you get in the elbows or the biceps or
the brachiialis after heavy low bar
squats. So if you're benching two times
a week, here's my strategy. Squat and
then the next bench press session, which
is me today, that's the lighter session.
And then you do the deadlift and then
another day off and then you go for the
heavy session. Do you get it? So now my
next heavy session is going to be
further away from my heavy squats to
give my arms a little bit more time to
rest. So, if I went to go heavy today,
uh, it probably wouldn't be very good.
It would probably hurt my arm. My my
arms are probably not fresh enough
because it's too close to my heavy squat
session. So, that's my strategy um, to
avoid that pain. So, when you say to me,
what's going through your head here?
It's a different thing now that's going
through my head than what it will be in
a couple of days when I go for my heavy
sets. It won't be as painful or it
shouldn't be as painful. And then, you
know what goes through my head with
heavy sets? Probably not much. Yeah. So,
a lot of the times when I'm doing a
heavy set, it's kind of like [__]
better get it, you know? So, it's like
the same as coaching a lifter, uh, you
know, over queueing. I'll tell you when
you do the over queuing or you teach,
uh, you know, the techniques or teach
the things is early on when you're
warming up, but then when you get to the
heavy sets, no more queuing. There's no
more time for that. Like maybe one or
two things, but typically now it's time
to it's like whatever technique you
have, don't change anything. I don't
want to change anything. I want the sets
to look exactly the same, right? And
even if you I had a seminar last week
where one of my lifters was was doing a
movement and he goes, "Come and watch my
top set and I watched it and there was
things that I wanted to change." He
said, "Um, you know, what did you
think?" And I said, "I think it's too
late to give you advice right now.
Finish your session because you're at
your top sets. We're not going to change
anything now." The mistake is to try and
change you now. So let like if you if
you got to that last warm-up set and
you're ready to go, do the same thing as
your last warm-up set. Don't make any
changes. And then you if there's any
errors with your technique, you make the
change on the next session or the or
maybe back down sets or you know when
you're warming up. So so heavy sets,
what goes through your head should be
nothing. Just
confidence. All right, let's go.
[Applause]
Good one. I feel the last rep.
I pushed in the wrong
line. You probably can't see it, but I
feel it when it's at a heavy weight. The
angle that you need to be pushing on is
slightly back. And on that one, I feel
it went slightly forward or or not back
enough. I think that's probably more
accurate to say it went not back enough.
So, sometimes that happens. That was
just like a little bit of a mishap. If
that was a maximal load, I would have
missed that last rep. But because it was
submaximal, it still came up. But that's
what you want is the the bar in a
deadlift, the bar needs to be in line
with the midfoot. So that's the center
of your base of support. But in a bench
press, the bar needs to be in line with
the elbow. So the elbows are tucked. So
watch this. My elbow is tucked. So the
hand needs to be perpendicular to the
elbow. So that's why if you see the bar
path, it kind of arcs back towards the
shoulder. So the lockout is over the
shoulder, but as you come down to the
sternum, it's a little bit lower. Right?
So from side on the bar path is down to
the sternum and then back to directly
over the shoulder. Not further than
that. All right. So that's important to
understand. A lot of people go they when
I teach a bench press I teach people to
think about a straight bar path and it
typically goes where it needs to go
which is in that slight angle. And the
reason I say that is because when people
think too much about that curved bar
path they end up taking it further back.
So it ends up you know floating over
your eyes. Can you see that? It's not in
line with my shoulders. It needs to be
in line with my shoulder at the lockout,
not here. If it's there, that's not
stacked. It's like holding a deadlift
with the barbell out here. You'll hurt
your back if it's a maximum load. You
won't be able to lift it. It needs to be
in line with the center of your basal
support with that one. Like I said, you
won't be able to see it on the video
because it's probably off by this much,
but I felt it. It went slightly forward.
Anyhow, 3x3. Next up, dumbbell press.
Okay, so nothing on Saturday. So, we're
going to go tomorrow's um session.
What's today? Friday. Tomorrow's session
will be, you know, whenever whenever we
can. Heavy deadlift and moderate squats.
All right. Where's my wrist
wraps? So, first set is a feel set where
I do a, you know, lighter dumbbell just
to get in the groove. And
then last week I did so seated dumbbell
shoulder press I did 50 kg for 10
paused. Uh so the thing
is I don't think I'll do 10 paused. So
the next incremental increase is 5 kilos
heavier each. So that's a 10% jump. So
this is what we need to consider with
dumbbells. So if I go up, which I do
want to do, I want to go up. There's a
lot of ways of progressing with
dumbbells. I could do the same weight
but go up in reps. Um but I want to go
heavy again. So, um, if I go up to 55
kilograms, so that's 10% jump, I won't
be able to do 10.
So, I don't know, six to eight is the
goal. Anyway, first set is a feel set.
Just do um, we're going to do two sets,
two top sets. Yeah. When I'm doing my
dumbbells, to be honest with you,
they're a lot more fatiguing than the
bench press. So, when I do like three
sets on a dumbbell on a on a bench
press, um the fatigue kind of like I can
manage it and every set is kind of
similar, but with the dumbbells, it's
like I've got two big sets and that's
it. So, for me, as we said initially,
people say, why do you do such low
volume? I don't think it's low volume. I
think it's adequate volume. And actually
there is research that supports that
with strength training that's the
optimal amount of volume per movement
pattern per week is four sets per
session two times per week. Right? So
I've already done three sets over there
and then I'm going to do two more sets
here. Right? So there's already five top
sets. That's for strength training.
Right?
I remember you saying um that you're not
great when you don't press but is it
okay to kill the press? There always
needs to be some level of arch right.
So, so a lot of people take this out of
hand. I mean, I was probably arching
more than what uh normal is, but for me
that's normal and it's totally fine, but
there needs to be some level of thoracic
extension to position your shoulder
blades in a way to place the arm
overhead, right? So, that's chest up Q.
So, if your shoulders are down, so this
is people that have office jobs and
they've got this shitty shoulder posture
all day long and they can't they don't
have that overhead mobility, right? So,
those are the people when they try and
press overhead, they get pain in the
front of their shoulders. Either because
they're positioning their shoulders in
the wrong way. Now, here's another
alternative is if you don't have that
thoracic extension, you've got to cop it
more in the lower back. So, for me,
that's also why I put it in the belt.
Sorry, I put the belt on. It's a
stronger brace for my overhead
press and my my core is engaged and uh
it's totally fine. So
ideally there should be some degree of
thoracic extension. So what's thoracic?
I'll show you what thoracic spine is on
my friend over here.
Do you know why he's not even looking?
Or maybe he turned his back after I
didn't give him any love. We don't know.
We have to get the surveillance cameras
out. Maybe he was looking and he's upset
with me. Anyway, let's talk about the
spine here. Right. So that's the lumbar.
That's the sacrum, right? All of those
vertebrae here are fused. That's a
coxix. This is the lumbar spine. There's
five lumbar vertebrae. Then we go to the
thoracic spine. Okay, there's 12
thoracic vertebrae. How do we know
they're thoracic? They're attached to
rib cage. And then above the thoracic
vertebrae is the cervical vertebrae.
Now, each of these have slightly
different shapes. The thoracic is
rounded this way. So, that's totally
fine. But what we want to do to be able
to position the shoulder blades kind of
in in the right position to to push
overhead. See this? I want to push that
overhead. I'm going to fix that. But
anyway, what we need that's going to
allow you to see the socket. So, this is
a ball and socket joint. What I need to
do is move that so that this socket,
think of a golf ball and a golf tea.
That's the golf ball. That's the head of
the humorus. Needs to be sitting on top
of the golf tea. So that's the golf tea.
It's pointing this way. So I need to
position
it in a way so that the socket is
pointing upwards. Does that make sense?
So the way to do that is this will only
move around the rib cage when
I position my thoracic spine in the
correct way which is in extension. Okay?
So feel it for yourself like arch your
back, arch your upper back and feel your
shoulder blade will naturally move.
Okay? So that's the action that has to
take place. So thoracic extension is
paired with the rotation that's required
in the shoulder blade to press overhead.
Does that make sense? So when people say
flat
back, I disagree. So flat back for all
of your incline press or your bend. I
disagree. There needs to be some degree
of thoracic extension to be able to
position the scapula to cradle the head
of the humorris so it
doesn't fall off.
So, this is going to take some love and
I need to
train. It's there for now. It's there
for now. So, we're going to do a fuel
set for my pull-ups. So, I'll do another
quick warm-up set for my pull with pull
downs and then we're doing band assisted
pull-ups today. Progression from last
week. Yeah, progression from last week.
I did sets of eight. I did four sets of
eight on the pull-ups last week. So,
this time I want to do an extra rep or
two.
[Music]
Okay, now that said, I was too far here,
but it was quite heavy to change my
position. I was sliding off the bench,
and I feel like had I tried to modify my
position, I would have fallen off cuz
that's heavy. So, 55 kg overhead for
eight. Paused. I'll do one more set of
that. Try and clean it up a little bit.
That's okay. Still a progression from
last week. Next up, band assisted
pull-ups. So, you know, that's
fatiguing. Did you see me after my bench
press? I wasn't like this. So, dumbbell
presses for me when I take it to that
limit. It beats me up and I and I
decline in energy really quickly with
these. So, I might only have one more
set. Whereas with my bench press, I
don't feel the same. So it's
interesting. I would call that more
systemically fatiguing. So that is
fatiguing. So it's a heavier weight.
This is a total of 110 kg. That was 170.
So the bench press is more systemically.
What does systemic fatigue mean? It's my
nervous system. My my whole body is
tired. Whereas when I do the shoulder
press, my muscles like my triceps and
deltoids are that's peripheral fatigue.
So it's a different level of fatigue. So
peripheral fatigue might be harder to
recover from for me within the session,
right? But in the long term, like from
session to session, it's easier to
recover from. That's why I take these
accessory exercises closer to failure
because I can recover um you know, like
couple of days. Whereas my heavy
sessions like that, I only do one heavy
bench. That's still heavy, but I still
consider it my lighter session cuz my
heavy session is going to be well, next
week I've got to do 190 for triples. So
that's an extra 20 kg. That'll be tough.
[Applause]
This is very little band assistance. I
wish it was more to be honest with you,
but that's
okay. So, back and forth with push and
pull because I can now. So, I don't want
like I don't mind. Let's just say I miss
a rep on the next set, which I doubt I
will, but I don't mind these ones for my
bench press. I don't want to miss reps.
So, that's why I won't superset my heavy
heavy
sets. So, my bench press, I'm waiting 8
minutes. For these ones, I'm waiting,
you know, dumbbell press 3 to 4 minutes
and then I go pull-ups 3 to 4 minutes
and back and forth between those two
because they're not as systemically
fatiguing. It's more peripheral fatigue,
so it's more targeted to the
muscles so they don't if they do
interfere with each other, it's minimal.
Whereas I don't want to do that when I
need to really be performing at a high
level for my bench press. Anyway, not
going to bore you with the small stuff.
Can we show them bicep and tricep
exercise before the workout? Yeah, sure.
I'm going to show you my favorite of
each. You going to show biceps after? I
will. I will. I'm not going to do biceps
before I need those muscles for my
pull-ups. So, I'm going to do after
pull-ups.
Yeah, I feel like I've got a lot of work
done. Biceps and triceps. Let's do some
of
[Music]
that in a minute. I need a rest, bro.
I'm going to show you the most bang for
your buck bicep exercise you can do, and
that's called a Zotman curl. So that's
where you supernate your wrists and
perform the curl in the supernated
position. Then we pronate and we perform
the eccentric in the pronated position.
So when we supernate, this engages more
biceps and when we pronate it engages
more of the forearm muscles and the
other elbow flexes. So when we do a
bicep curl, it's not just biceps that
we're engaging to flex the elbow. The
biceps are one part of it. The others
are underneath the biceps is the
brachialis which is more active now on
the pronated position as well as the
brachio radiialis. So if you want to
target all of those heads, this is the
movement and the next benefit of this
exercise is the pronated position is
weaker because we're doing it in absence
of our biceps. So, we're turning biceps
off, but also we're using our forearm
extensors rather than our forearm. The
forearm flexes are stronger than the
extensors. So, because we are stronger
eccentrically, it allows us to use a
heavier weight for the eccentric and
overload the forearm extensors and the
brachiialis and the brachio radiialis.
So, this is one of the most bang for
your buck
well-rounded. I'm not going to call it a
bicep exercise. elbow flexor exercise
because our elbow flexes aren't limited
to just biceps.
If you do like how many sets? Yeah,
three sets, eight to 12 in one session.
Great addition to
your whole body program. Triceps. Next
up, triceps. This isn't breakthrough
information because a lot of people are
doing it, but may as well have it on my
page. So, this is my favorite wrist
wrap. Not sponsored by these guys, but
they are gangster wraps by Slingshot,
Mark Bell. They're my favorite because
actually the material is quite soft.
Very different to a knee wrap. Stiffer
is not necessarily better. I like a
thinner and more softer wrist wrap
because it contours to your wrist a lot
better than a stiffer wrap. So this
loop, a lot of people might, you know,
put your thumb in it and wrap it around
like that. I don't like that because
it's hard to get that out. In
powerlifting competitions, they make you
take it out. So, what I use that loop
for is I hold on to it. I hold on to it
so that when I finish wrapping, I can
just let go and it's out of my hands
now. It's not linked onto any of my
fingers. So, I hold onto it. The next
thing I do, I don't just hold on to it.
I squeeze tight. I squeeze a fist
because if you're being too passive here
and you wrap your wrist really tight, it
can squash your hand and your hand can
cramp up and it's in the wrong position.
So, what I like to do is grab it and
hold a tight fist and wrap my wrist
around a a clenched fist. Now, have a
look at the wrist joint. Don't just do
it all underneath the wrist joint. That
defeats the purpose. You want to have
That's the wrist joint here. You want to
have the center of the wrap over the
top. So, that's the center. That's my
wrist joint right in the middle of the
wrap. So, that's the first revolution
here. First revolution. And then I don't
just keep going over the same spot. Now
I'll just gradually go down for comfort.
And that is my wrist
wrap.
Strong. It's also not so strong that
it's strangulating my hand and it's in
in an uncomfortable position cuz I
clenched my fist first. Uh, and a very
effective wrist
wrap. Dumbbell skull crushers or skull
press, whatever you like to call these.
So, I typically like to do this with a
an easy
barbell because it's more loadable, but
from time to time, I like to use
dumbbells as well, and it's the same
principles
apply. What you want is full elbow
flexion. So, my bicep is touching my
forearms here in that bottom position.
That allows for a full stretch of the
triceps to a full lockout.
[Applause]
I don't know how many reps that because
I was talking, but typical rep range is
8 to 12, and I like to isolate between
biceps and
triceps. Two more sets on each. Anyway,
that's me for the session. Great way to
finish the session with an arm pump. I'm
going to see you guys next time. I hope
you enjoyed this. Next time, what are we
doing? That's going to be tomorrow. I've
got my heavy deadlifts and my accessory
squats. So, make sure you tune in to
that. Click like, subscribe, all that
stuff. See you next time.